---
title: 3. Classes
tags: 
date: 2024-10-11
aliases: 
cssclasses:
---

Classes in Scala are blueprints for creating objects. They can contain methods, values, variables, types, objects, traits, and classes which are collectively called _members_. Types, objects, and traits will be covered later in the tour.

## Defining a class
A minimal class definition is simply the keyword `class` and an identifier. Class names should be *capitalized*.
```scala
class User

val user1 = User()
```
We call the class like a function, as `User()`, to create an instance of the class. It is also possible to explicitly use the `new` keyword, as `new User()`, although that is usually left out.

`User` has a default constructor which takes no arguments because no constructor was defined. However, you’ll often want a constructor and class body. Here is an example class definition for a point:
```scala
class Point(var x: Int, var y: Int):

	def move(dx: Int, dy: Int): Unit =
		x = x + dx
		y = y + dy
	
	override def toString: String =
		s$"($x, $y)"
end Point

val point1 = Point(2, 3)
println(point1.x) // 2
println(point1)   // (2, 3)
```

This `Point` class has four members: the variables `x` and `y` and the methods `move` and `toString`. Unlike many other languages, the primary constructor is in the class signature `(var x: Int, var y: Int)`. The `move` method takes two integer arguments and returns the Unit value `()`, which carries no information. This corresponds roughly to `void` in Java-like languages. `toString`, on the other hand, does not take any arguments but returns a `String` value. Since `toString` overrides `toString` from [[2. Unified Types|AnyRef]], it is tagged with the `override` keyword.

## Constructors

Constructors can have optional parameters by providing a default value like so:
```scala
class Point(var x: Int = 0, var y: Int = 0)

val origin = Point() // x and y are both set to 0
val point1 = Point(1) // x is set to 1 and y is set to 0
println(point1) // (1, 0)
```

In this version of the `Point` class `x` and `y` have the default value 0 so no arguments are required. However, because the constructor reads arguments left to right, if you just wanted to pass in a y value, you would need to name the parameter.
```scala
class Point(var x: Int = 0, var y: Int = 0)
val point2 = Point(y = 2)
println(point2) // (0, 2)
```

This is also a good practice to enhance clarity.

## Private Members and Getter/Setter Syntax

Members are public by default. Use the `private` access modifier to hide them from outside of the class.
```scala
class Point:
	private var _x = 0
	private var _y = 0
	private val bound = 100
	
	def x: Int = x
	def x_=(newValue: Int): Unit =
		if newValue < bound then
			_x = newValue
		else
			printWarning()
	
	def y: Int = y
	def y_=(newValue: Int): Unit =
		if newValue < bound then
			_y = newValue
		else
			printWarning()
	
	private def printWarning(): Unit =
		println("WARNING: Out of Bounds")
end Point

val point1 = Point()
point1.x = 99
point1.y = 101 // prints the warning
```
In this version of the `Point` class, the data is stored in private variables `_x` and `_y`. There are methods `def x` and `def y` for accessing the private data. `def x_=` and `def y_=` are for validating and setting the value of `_x` and `_y`. Notice the special syntax for the setters: the method has `_=` appended to the identifier of the getter and the parameters come after.

Primary constructor parameters with `val` and `var` are public. However, because `val`s are immutable, you can’t write the following.
```scala
class Point(val x: Int, val y: Int)
val point = Point(1, 2)
point.x = 3 // <-- does not compile
```

Parameters without `val` or `var` are private values, visible only within the class.
```scala
class Point(x: Int, y: Int)
val point = Point(1, 2)
point.x // <-- does not compile
```

